# Raw Data Analysis

The initial raw data originates from [The International Consortium of Investigative Journalists, Inc.](https://www.icij.org/) — "an independent global network of 280 investigative journalists and over 140 media organizations spanning more than 100 countries." [^1]. Our initial work here involves their "Offshore Leaks Database". The dataset is a collection of leaked financial documents that exposed links between people (some of them very well known) to offshore companies, foundations and trusts. Offshore and "shell" companies are commonly used by entities to hide wealth from public scrutiny.

## Data Acquisition
Unfortunately, the only known access to the raw data is via a link on the [offshore data page](https://offshoreleaks.icij.org/pages/database). I've sent an email (sent Jan 17 2023, resent to different address on Jan 27 2023) to the ICIJ technical team to see if they can provide more access via git or some other more stable mechanism.

Until then we'll charge ahead with an analysis of the data from [this](https://offshoreleaks-data.icij.org/offshoreleaks/csv/full-oldb.20221031.zip) file. Note, it's over 70MB zipped, so I'm choosing to not check it into git (at least for the time being). Ideally, it would be great to be able to submodule a raw data repo from ICIJ.

## Data Organization

The raw data is separated into CSV files:

* nodes-entities.csv - ~814,000 records; companies, trusts and foundations
* nodes-officers.csv - ~771,000 records; officers (people)
* nodes-intermediaries.csv - ~26,000 records; intermediaries (people or entities)
* nodes-addresses.csv - ~402,000 records; addresses
* nodes-others.csv - ~2,900 records; other entities
* relationships.csv - ~3.3M records; relationships between all node types

Using csvstat from [CSVKit](https://github.com/wireservice/csvkit), I've added output of that tool to the [/notes/csvstat](/notes/csvstat) folder. This is a great way to understand the composition of large CSV files.

## Data Analysis

### Common 'predicates'
Across all CSV files, we find common fields (which will not be discussed in the per-file sections below)

* `node_id`: This is the unique positive integer identifier for nodes. Ranges by type:

    | Node type      | Start       | End         |
    | -------------- | ----------- | ----------- |
    | Entities       | 66,978      | 240,554,209 |
    | Officers       | 1           | 240,556,394 |
    | Intermediaries | 21,309      | 240,099,001 |
    | Others         | 80,000,012  | 240,558,070 |
    | Addresses      | 67,268      | 240,492,577 |

    From this analysis, we can see that there is overlap so we can't infer that a particular
    id is a "type" simply by its node_id range. However, careful analysis shows that the node_ids
    are unique throughout the data set. For instance, node_id 51149 appears in both intermediaries and the entity files and it defines the same information in both places. This seems like a 'completeness' problem as the relationships amongst entities is defined in the relationships.csv file, and should never be inferred from any file the record was in.

* `name`: a text field used in all entity files, max length of 242. `None` is used frequently.
* `countries`: a text field, example data 'United Kingdom'
* `country_codes`: three letter designator for countries, e.g., MLT
* `internal_id`: number, seems to be some ICIJ identifier
* `sourceID`: text field, the ICIJ data set the record comes from, e.g., 'Paradise Papers - Malta corporate registry'. 22 unique values
* `valid_until`: text field, describes the 'freshness' of the record, e.g., 'The Panama Papers data is current through 2015'
* various dates: always in DD-MMM-YYYY format

### Entities (node-entities.csv)
Companies, Trusts and Foundations

* `name`: text, the 'current' name of the entity. There are 29 null names (how's that?)
* `original_name`: text field, seems to be the non-structured entry of name and former name. There are over 6,000 entities where name != original_name
* `former_name`: text field, a former name of the entity
* `jurisdiction`: text field, a three letter country designation. Note that 'XXX' appears more than 53,000 times. I'm guessing this is a "Undetermined" entry (see below)
* `jurisdiction_description`: text field, country fully spelled out. "Undetermined" appears over 53,000 times, but not exactly the same count as `jurisdiction` = 'XXX'. 'XX' for `jurisdiction` also seems to mean "Undetermined"[^2]
* `company_type`: text field, type of company. There are 66 unique types, I've pulled them out of the entities file into [distinct_company_types.txt](discovery/distinct_company_types.txt). Seems to be somewhat arbitrary
* `address`: text field, the full mailing address of the company. "None" appears over 515,000 times. Probably best to use the address and relationships data for this relationship
* `incorporation_date`: date, over 25,000 entries are null
* `inactivation_date`: date, over 669,000 entries are null
* `struck_off_date`: date, over 470,000 entries are null
* `dorm_date`: date, over 794,000 entries are null
* `status`: text field, 84 unique values. Seems to be arbitrary, see [distinct_company_status.txt](discovery/distinct_company_status.txt)
* `service_provider`: text field, (entity that provides service?) that is associated somehow with the entity record. Over 470,000 null values. A few names are repeated hundreds of thousands of times
* `ibcRUC`: text field, seems to be a Neo4J-specific field?
* `country_codes`: text field, over 1,100 unique values, over 309,000 nulls. Three letter codes like 'MLT' are most common. Somewhat correlated to `jurisdiction`. About 373,000 records have `country_codes` not equal to `jurisdiction`. Can be a list separated by semi-colons, such as `VGB;SGP;GBR;HKG`
* `countries`: text field, unstructured name for `country_codes`
* `note`: text field, unstructured comments from the ICIJ staff. Over 772,000 null values, 198 unique values

### Others (node-others.csv)
Other Companies, Trusts and Foundations (not sure why these aren't in nodes-entities.csv)

* `name`: text, the 'current' name of the 'other' entity
* `former_name`: text field, a former name of the entity
* `type`: text field, type of company. Many null entries. There are 3 unique types: `LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY`, `SOLE OWNERSHIP`, `FOREIGN FORMED CORPORATION` 
* `incorporation_date`: date, most entries are null
* `struck_off_date`: date, most entries are null
* `closed_date`: date, most entries are null
* `jurisdiction`: text field, a two or three letter country designation. Note that 'AW' appears more than 800 times, over 2,000 nulls
* `jurisdiction_description`: text field, country fully spelled out. Over 2,000 nulls
* `countries`: text field, unstructured name for `country_codes`
* `country_codes`: text field, 64 unique values, over 2,600 nulls. Three letter codes like 'IMN' are most common. Can be a list separated by semi-colons, such as `BMU;DEU;CHE;USA`
* `note`: text field, unstructured comments from the ICIJ staff. Mostly null
### Intermediaries (node-intermediaries.csv)
People or entities that are intermediaries

* `name`: text field, usually a person's name in `<Last> <First>, <Middle Initial>` format
* `status`: text field, 10 unique fields, over 14,000 null values. Common: `ACTIVE,SUSPENDED`. See [intermediaries_distinct_status.txt](discovery/intermediaries_distinct_status.txt)
* `address`: text field, the full mailing address of the intermediary. "None" appears over 18,000 times. Probably best to use the address and relationships data for this relationship
* `countries` and `country_codes`: see above
* `note`: text field, unstructured comments from the ICIJ staff. Over 26,000 null values, less than 10 records have notes


### Officers (node-officers.csv)
People (~771,000 records)

* `name`: text field, name of the person although there are "entity" names in this data set, e.g., "CLEMENTI LIMITED", which appears over 1,000 times. The most common entry is "THE BEARER" and "Bearer 1", which uniquely appears over 10% of the time. With the exception of a few that have countries associated with them, these records are almost all "empty". So guessing these officers whose identities are unknown
* `countries` and `country_codes`: see above

### Addresses (node-addresses.csv)
Addresses (~402,000 records)

* `address`: text field, unstructured and usually includes the name of the entity/person. Interesting there are over 19,000 null values, I'm guessing that means only the country is known
* `name`: text field, this seems to be a somewhat structured address (it excludes the entity name). However over 178,000 records are null, so some parsing of the `address` field may be necessary when this field is null
* `countries` and `country_codes`: see above. A rough sampling shows high correlation between the country identified in the `name` and/or `address` and the `country_codes`. There *are* 7 records that have 2 country_codes (separated by a semicolon) and indeed have two addresses is the `address` field. That's pretty ugly, see [address_multiple_country_codes.txt](discovery/address_multiple_country_codes.txt)

### Relationships (relationships.csv)
Relationships for all the nodes (~3.3M records)

* `node_id_start`: this is the 'from' node id, never null
* `node_id_end`: this is the 'to' node id, never null
* `rel_type`: text field, no nulls, 14 unique values. See [relationship_types.txt](discovery/relationship_types.txt).
* `link`: text field, has nulls. Seems to be a a re-wording of `rel_type`. Some values are lengthy (281 chars)
* `status`: text field, either null, "Resigned", or "Appointed". Probably used for people->entity relationships
* `start_date`: date, has nulls (~65%). Also, use of '31-DEC-1969' (over 1,800 instances) might be a null as well. Presume this is the start date of the relationship
* `end_date`: date, has nulls (~90%). Presume this is the end date of the relationship

[^1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_Consortium_of_Investigative_Journalists

[^2]: csvsql --query 'select jurisdiction, jurisdiction_description  from "nodes-entities" WHERE jurisdiction_description = "Undetermined" AND jurisdiction != "XXX"'