# Schema Design

Following the [raw data analysis](1. Raw Data Analysis.md), we can now start the process of designing a schema for the graph to store the Offshore Leaks Dataset. But a good task to accomplish prior to that is an analysis of the ways users might want to query the graph.

## Queries (currently available on the ICIJ website)

### Text search across the graph
Currently, the ICIJ website allows users to enter terms that match nodes in entities, officers, intermediaries, others and addresses. For example, searching the term *New Hampshire* yields results in all five categories. Quotes can be used to restrict to exact phrases. The user can choose to narrow down the result listing by data type (entity, officer, etc.).

Further restriction of results to just one data set (Panama Papers, Paradise Papers, etc.) can be accomplished.

Similarly, restriction of the results to "Linked Countries" and "Registered Jurisdictions" can be accomplished.

### Selection of results
Clicking on a result record opens up a new page with details about the node in text form and a rendered graph (via Linkurious) which expands immediate edges. For example, an entity result page might have a rendered graph with all the officers, intermediaries and related addresses.

### Graphical interactions
In the graphical rendering, display nodes that have unrendered edges have a small numeric icon that indicates the number of hidden edges. Double-clicking on the node expands those edges (up to 10).

## New Queries
I propose that we support all queries that currently exist on the ICIJ website, and add new functionality as defined below.

### Text search with option for "full text/stemming"
In addition to term searching, let's allow fulltext searching as well. In the UI, perhaps this is a toggle or if the number of results is below a threshold, attempt to find more via 'fulltext' search.

### Search via address-resolved geolocation coordinates
I propose that we attempt to normalize addresses in the data sets using the AWS Location service. The service allows for free-form address text input and returns geo coordinates.  Constructing map views by querying this data should be straightforward.

### Path discovery
Given two or more entities, support "closest path" queries between them to allow researchers to discover non-obvious connections. Displaying this in a graphical rendering should be straightforward.

## Custom DQL
The final design of the GraphQL schema will concede that some custom DQL will have to be written to support lower-level, pure graph queries. As this is common in large production graphs, it will serve well as an example of best-practices.

## Future Additional Data
We may integrate other data sources into the VLG. Fortunately, Dgraph's schema flexibility allows the easy addition of potential types and predicates discovered in the future. However, we did review the following source schemas to ensure no schema conflicts would arise should those sources be integrated.

- OCCRP: https://github.com/occrp-attic/schema/tree/gh-pages/generic
- OpenSanctions: https://www.opensanctions.org/
- GDELT: https://www.gdeltproject.org/

## Understanding Relationships in the Data
From the raw CSV files, it's not possible to know the all the entity types that comprise relationships. We used [Badger](https://github.com/dgraph-io/badger) (the embedded KV store that Dgraph uses) to temporarily load all entities and relationships so that we can discover all the relationship matches in the data. The golang code for this is located in `/tools`. Later we'll use some of this code and the Badger db to geolocate addresses and to write the RDF files suitable for importing into Dgraph.

## Data Cleaning
During the process of storing the ICIJ data in Badger, we came across a number of anomalies in the data that needed addressing. For an example, see [/tools/model/datetime.go](/tools/model/datetime.go) where a number of poorly formatted dates needed to be converted.

## Schema Design
We decided to build the schema using GraphQL [SDL](https://graphql.org/learn/schema/). Dgraph supports both SDL and its own proprietary DQL schema syntax. One benefit of SDL is the ability to use _interfaces_ and _enumerations_, both of which came in handy for the end schema.

All records in the ICIJ data share many attributes (predicates). Additionally, the relationship types defined between records can vary, e.g., _Entities_ can have both _Intermediary_ and _Officer_ records defined as officers[^1]. These discoveries dictate the use of an SDL _interface_. 

```GraphQL
"""
Record is the base type for all records in the graph.
"""
interface Record {
    id: ID!

    "The offshore links 'node_id'"
    nodeID: String! @id
    "The ICIJ internal ID"
    internalID: String @search(by: [exact])
    "The record source"
    sourceID: String @search(by: [exact])
    "Notes about the record"
    notes: String @search(by: [fulltext])

    "The associated name"
    name: String! @search(by: [term, fulltext, regexp])
    ~~snip~~
```
Note the use of SDL comments above the interface and every predicate. Note only does this make reading the schema easier, the generated GraphQL API that Dgraph creates from this schema uses these comments to auto-document itself.

Relationships amongst records are explicitly defined, e.g.,

```GraphQL
    "Officers associated with the record"
    hasOfficer: [Record!]
    "Records for which this Officer is associated"
    officerFor: [Record!]
```

Although Dgraph supports automatic inverse edge generation through its _@hasInverse_ directive, we chose to use explicit predicates for relationships. The @hasInverse directive is non-standard, forces Dgraph to do work "behind-the-scenes", and is not supported when performing bulk mutations. Further, the edge labels are easier to understand when explicitly defined.

Although not present in the ICIJ dataset, we added a geo-location predicate (location) for addresses:

```GraphQL
"""
Address represents physical addresses.
"""
type Address implements Record {
    "The full text address, unstructured. Record.name is the normalized field"
    address: String @search(by: [exact, term, fulltext, regexp])

    "The source of the geolocation data for the address"
    geoSource: String @search(by: [term])

    "The geolocation of the address"
    location: Point @search
}
```

During the bulk load phase, we'll populate this predicate with geo-location data derived from the address string. The ability to search the ICIJ data by geo-location is one of our goals.

The [GraphQL Schema](/schema/schema.graphql) is located in the [schema](/schema) folder.

[^1]: [notes/discovery/relationship-counts.txt](notes/discovery/relationship-counts.txt)